Title: 2010/11: Stuff That Happened
Date: 2011-07-06 20:00
Author: Adam Greig
Tags: Electronics
Slug: 201011-stuff-that-happened

![Firefly](http://farm5.staticflickr.com/4086/4835953772_d24507d3d0.jpg)

So it's been over a year since I posted about that NERF turret! I've not
been totally idle since but nothing's really finished to a high enough
standard to blog about. Instead, here's a post of almost-finished
projects, crushed dreams and lost hopes!

**July 2010:** I built the above pretty firefly from some paperclips, LEDs and
an ATtiny. It lights up when you hold it, and sleeps the rest of the
time. When it lights up, though, it pulses pretty firefly patterns using
an 8-bit pseudo-random shift register.

**August 2010:** [Jon][] and I soldered up the first revision of SelWX,
which took ages due to some bent pins on the STM32. Sadly we never got
around to writing much code for it so while we got it pinging, that's
about it for r1. We'll probably do an r2 fairly soon with easier
hardware and try to get something working.

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/randomskk/4869361557/" title="SelWX r1 Soldered"><img src="http://farm5.staticflickr.com/4118/4869361557_f683348c8b.jpg" alt="SelWX r1 Soldered" /></a>

**October 2010:** I wanted to make my long coat light up, so I sewed 20
lillypad LEDs into it. It worked, but only very briefly before my power
busses broke, and sadly I didn't get any photos of it in action. I've
got the parts to redo it for this winter season though =D

**January 2011:** Jon and I tried to make a small FM radio transmitter,
but it didn't work. We didn't have much time to investigate why. I also
made a nightlight out of epoxy and coloured dyes and LEDs and all that,
but sadly don't have any photos.

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/randomskk/5311110792/" title="FM bug"><img src="http://farm6.staticflickr.com/5282/5311110792_98f9b5a354.jpg" alt="FM bug" /></a>

**May 2011:** I took apart this NERF gun to try and mod it to be fully
electronically automatic, with a micro stepper motor mounted inside the
clip and a small solenoid actuating the mechanism. Unfortunately the
mounting hardware involved proved really complex, and a surprisingly
amount of force was required to actuate, so nothing really came of this
(but now I have some steppers, solenoids and drivers in my spare
parts...)

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/randomskk/5697772938/" title="Nerf Barricade"><img src="http://farm6.staticflickr.com/5190/5697772938_a731673172.jpg" alt="Nerf Barricade" /></a>

**June 2011:** I made this breakout board for an ADF7012 radio to test
out some new telemetry ideas for CU Spaceflight. It's not working yet,
but hopefully soon...

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/randomskk/5909357111/" title="ADF7012 breakout board"><img src="http://farm7.staticflickr.com/6010/5909357111_06993f79f5.jpg" alt="ADF7012 breakout board" /></a>

Anyway maybe now I'll do some more hardware stuff and actually blog
about it in time!

  [Jon]: http://hexoc.com
